and also this story this one does divide
the room somewhat a one-off wealth tax
will be the best way to patch up
uk public finances battered by the
coronavirus crisis this is according to
the wealth
tax commission they said the government
should look at attacks on millionaire
couples
rather than increasing income tax or vat
taxing those households
an extra one percent above one million
pound threat of one million pound
threshold
would raise 260 billion pounds
over five years uh let's speak to gary
stevenson
um himself a millionaire former trader
wants the wealthy to pay
for covid now an inequality uh is that
right an inequality economist
yes that's right yeah afternoon gary the
only reason i've
the only reason i paused at that i
thought you were championing inequality
for a second
that would be a curious job to have
wouldn't it um but you're an economist
looking at
issues of inequality and i said at the
beginning of this gary or just before
the news this one divides me somewhat
and i'm sure
lots of people you know feel the same
because i can see how persuasive
persuasive and seductive the argument is
you know if somebody is worth a few quid
it's a one-off tax then you know why not
it's not going to be forever
you could argue it's in their interest
as well long term uh but there's another
part of it i think well if you always go
cap in hand to rich people
you could play that game every day of
the week that there's any kind of crisis
yeah that's the concern it's addressed
in the report a lot of the uh
sir some economists at the london school
of economics and a group of lawyers and
tax accounts have looked at this
um yeah there is um they've addressed
that in the report
i think the thing we need to consider
here is there's a massive increase as
everybody knows in government that due
to the global crisis
it's coming up to half a trillion pounds
just from this year
um something has to be done about that
it will have to be addressed
um at the moment the very richest in our
society often pay
the lowest rates of tax you know it's
famous some billionaires pay less than
their cleaners
um as a rate someone's gonna yes as a
rate yeah someone's uh
gonna have to deal with this um and if
it's not the
very richest who often pay very little
then it might have to be
hard-working people like you and i again
i mean in terms of
tax thresholds just i mean you will know
a bit about this gary you've
you did well in the city and you've
earned a few quid and that's fabulous
what happens in terms of taxation once
you
what is the top rate of tax you can pay
at that level
well i think the top rate of income tax
at the moment is 45 so that doesn't
change between
having you know 150 000 or 50 000 to
having
two billion no well when i was working
there was temporarily a fifty percent
rate tax that's right at the moment the
uh
top rate is back down to forty five
percent so it's still forty five percent
there's nothing above that
yeah but what's important to realize is
that tax gets charged on worked income
but the very richest people they make a
lot of their income often most of their
income in the case of the richest
in ways that is not through working for
example trusts inheritances capital
gains
and these methods of income are taxed
often a lot less and some of these guys
will be paying
less than 20 tax and they may even be
making billions in income
yeah so there comes a question where you
have to ask why are people who are
earning
50 60 grand a year paying 45 when the
duke of westminster's making nine
billion pounds are not paying anything
yeah and in terms of your own situation
i mean you've done well i don't think
you're making nine billion quid gary but
um no not nonetheless you would be
prepared to pay more
i'll tell you what at the moment in this
country we've got a chancellor
whose father-in-law is a
multi-billionaire and his wife is
estimated to worth about half a billion
pounds if rishi sunk pays i'll pay
but then rishi sooner might say well
okay that's all very well but he
shouldn't be judged on his spouse and
her family
all right if she's the next wife
self-made man yeah okay
if mrs sunak pace pays the big bundle
then then you will as well
how would you i mean would you just have
a one-off
payment do you think that would work or
do you think there should be a
um a a kind of an increase
in the in the basic rates of income tax
because the the smart money always says
gary as you know
uh that if you up it to 50 and i believe
there is
evidence for this when gordon brown had
his sort of five minutes at the 50
percent rate of it this is just income
tax
uh that the intake was actually the
overall tax intake was slightly less
because people just found ways to avoid
it
you know i really want to try and be
clear about drawing the lion here
there's a difference here between what
these guys are doing in this report is
they're talking about taxing wealth
so it's maybe families that have they
might have accumulated wealth over
possibly centuries you know 50 million
100 million pounds
true it's about taxing families that are
accumulating huge amounts of wealth and
their wealth is just getting bigger and
bigger
they often don't pay income tax because
they don't get their income through
working like
you do or like i did when i was working
so it's we're not talking about taxing
lawyers and doctors here
we're talking about taxing extremely
wealthy families who are accumulating
wealth over generations and often
don't get their income through work so
it's not really about what level of
income tax it's about
do we get the super super rich to pay at
all yeah because often
right now they're not paying all yeah so
it's a kind of misnomer really the idea
that
we talk about income tax and we kind of
obsess on that but actually
the real big bunch comes from elsewhere
it comes from those funds
those pots those investments it's those
kind of areas yeah it's a choice in a
way because you know
you know there's a massive debt here
it's increased huge somebody has to pay
it
and in a sense the government has to
choose do we go to the super rich
like for example the chancellor's wife
or do we go to people who are working
yeah and at the moment i've worked and
i've paid a lot of tax
but a lot of these guys who are a lot
richer than me many many many times
richer than me and i presume you as well
are not paying anything and it's not
fair and it's damaging to the economy
because if you squeeze the middle class
then there's no spending you know yeah
wish your next wife is not going to keep
the whole economy alive we need to tax
the rich as well
do you think the government response to
that might but apart from ideologically
they would say it's not
the right thing to do and we can argue
that forever but
do you think the government might say
well we'd need to set up
such a complicated system in order to
find where all of those
funds and investments look that it would
become impossible
yeah i mean i mean when you consider as
we've said that the chancellor's
father-in-law is a multi-billionaire the
government might say something like that
but um the work that the economists and
the various people on this panel have
done today
is basically saying look we've done the
work we've shown you how you can do it
we've shown you how it can work and
there are other economies in america
have done similar work like gabriel
zuckerman
you know the economists are putting the
work in to show how you can do it
we need the government to come on board
and say look we are committed to making
sure the richest
pay as well and the economists will work
with them i'll work with them for free
look if they want to call me up i'll
work with them i'll tell them how to do
it
but we need to know they're on side and
in theory they're on board with making
sure
the super rich like richardson x family
like jacob rees-mogg actually pay their
way and it's not just put on the
hard-working people of this country
good work gary thank you gary stevenson
former trader
himself a millionaire would happily pay
more money
if other people were doing it but is it
down to the rich
to fill that void